1. Describe each of the levels of structure of a protein indicate the types of bonds or molecular interactions responsible for each level and be able to identify each if provided a description or diagram.
2. Identify the C-terminus and the N-terminus of a polypeptide.
3. Describe how the shape and surface chemistry affect the potential function of a protein.
4. Discuss how environmental conditions such as temperature pH and high concentrations of both polar and nonpolar substances can affect protein structure and therefor function.
5. Describe the role of heat shock proteins.
1. Describe the basic structure molecular composition and properties of lipids (fats).
2. List 4 examples of types of lipids and describe the roles each play in living systems.
3. Describe the structure of triglycerides (what component parts are these made of and how are the parts linked together?).
4. Distinguish the structures and properties of saturated fatty acids and unsaturated fatty acids. Be able to identify a fatty acid as saturated or unsaturated if shown the Lewis structure.
5. Describe the unique features of phospholipids draw their basic structure and describe their unique molecular properties.
6. Define the term “amphipathic” and how this applies to phospholipids. Describe how these molecules allow the formation of a biological membrane.
7. Compare and contrast the molecular structures properties and functions of phospholipids carotenoids steroids lipid based vitamins and waxes in living systems.
1. Describe how enzymes act as catalysts in facilitating reactions.
2. Explain the concepts of activation energy transition states and how enzymes alter these to make reactions proceed.
3. Describe the different mechanisms enzymes use to lower the energy barrier: orienting substrates inducing strain temporarily adding chemical groups (acid-base catalysis covalent catalysis metal ion catalysis)
4. Describe the properties of active sites and allosteric sites and how substrate or competitor binding at these sites can alter the shape and function of the enzyme.
5. Explain what is meant by induced fit and how this relates to substrate and or inhibitor binding.
6. Describe the types of intermolecular interactions responsible for substrate/inhibitor binding and specificity.
7. Diagram a basic enzymatic reaction including the terms substrate enzyme substrate complex and products.
8. Describe the roles of prosthetic groups inorganic cofactors and coenzymes in enzyme catalysis and provide an example of each.
9. Describe how environmental conditions such as substrate concentration temperature and pH effect enzyme activity at the molecular level.
10. Explain the differences between reversible inhibition and irreversible inhibition and provide an example of how each of these might be achieved.
11. Compare and contrast competitive inhibition and noncompetitive inhibition. Explain how each of these is mediated what other types of molecules are involved where they bind the enzyme and what the effect would be of adding more substrate.
12. Explain what is meant by feedback inhibition (or end product inhibition) and describe the logic of this. Indicate what types of pathways might be regulated in this manner and be able to diagram how this works.
13. Describe what the term allosteric regulation means and how this mechanism of regulation could lead to either inhibition or activation of enzyme function.
14. Explain how enzymes can be regulated by phosphorylation and what the role of kinases and phosphatases are in this regulation.
15. Describe the 5 main types of reactions that enzymes catalyze in biology and be able to recognize them.
1. Explain the 3 components of the cell theory.
2. Describe what is meant by the surface area-to-volume ratio and explain how this limits the size of a cell.
3. Describe the defining features of prokaryotic cells and eukaryotic cells.
1. Describe the basic features of the plasma membrane and what roles it plays for the cell.
2. Describe in detail and be able to draw and label a plasma membrane including the organization of the phospholipids that form it and each of the following additional components: glycoproteins and glycolipids peripheral membrane proteins cholesterol and integral membrane proteins.
3. For each of the components found in a plasma membrane describe their functions and the intermolecular interactions that associate them with the membrane.
4. Describe the role of the plasma membrane in cell adhesion and cell recognition and provide detailed descriptions of the structures that play a role in these processes.
5. List and describe the properties functions and molecular make up of the 3 types of cell junctions in animal cells: tight junctions desmosomes and gap junctions. Describe how plasmodesmata connect plant cells.
6. Describe what is meant by “extracellular matrix” what this is made of and how integrin proteins are" involved in attachment of a cell to it.
7. Describe 6 key functions carried out by proteins and protein complexes in the membrane.
8. Compare and contrast the three distinct processes by which substances can diffuse across a lipid "bilayer: simple diffusion osmosis and facilitated diffusion. Include a description of any protein" players that are involved.
9. Explain how factors such as the size of molecules the degree to which they are nonpolar and their" "ability to hydrogen bond with water affect their movement across lipid bilayers.
10. Explain the mechanisms that give rise to turgor in plant cells.
11. Describe the effects of very dilute and very concentrated solutions on animal cells and be able to" properly use the terms hypertonic and hypotonic.
12. Explain what is meant by osmotic pressure and describe the role of aquaporins in
13. Explain the operation of channel vs. carrier proteins including the effect of solute concentration on their performance.
14. Compare and contrast active transport vs. facilitated diffusion.
15. Explain how ATP contributes to both primary and secondary active transport.
16. Diagram the actions of uniporters symporters and antiporters and distinguish their contributions to" cellular activities.
17. Describe the action of the sodium-potassium ATPase and the concentration gradients that it creates and describe what is meant by a membrane potential."
18. Describe the process of endocytosis and compare and contrast phagocytosis pinocytosis and receptor-mediated endocytosis.
19. Describe how receptor-mediated endocytosis works and what other molecules are involved.
20. Describe the process of exocytosis and give examples of large and small molecules that can be released.
21. List describe and provide examples of other functions carried out by membranes within cells.
1. Describe the structure of the nucleus and nuclear pores and summarize the permeability features of the pores.
2. Describe the endomembrane system and list the cellular structures that it includes.
3. Compare and contrast the functions of RER and SER. Explain the processes that occur in each.
4. Diagram the structure of the Golgi apparatus indicating its dynamic trafficking activities.
5. Describe four contributions of the Golgi apparatus to cell functions.
6. Describe the process by which lysosomes convert waste and other substances into useful materials for the cell and explain why the contents of the lysozyme should be kept isolated from the rest of the cellular material.
7. Diagram the structure of a mitochondrion and explain the processes that take place at different locations.
8. Describe the basic properties of mitochondria and how they are different from other organelles in the cell.
9. Summarize the structure and function of chloroplasts and contrast them with other plastids. Indicate in what cell types these exist.
10. Describe the structure and functions of peroxisomes glyoxysomes and vacuoles and indicate in which cell types these exist.
11. Summarize four main functions of vacuoles and relate these to its structure.
12. Describe the general functions of the cytoskeleton and compare and contrast the structures and functions of microfilaments intermediate filaments and microtubules. Provide an example of a cellular process in which each of these is involved.
13. Compare and contrast the structure and function of cilia and flagella and describe basal bodies centrioles dynein and kinesin."
14. Compare and contrast the plasma membrane with the cell wall; what are their differences in composition chemical properties and function?
15. Describe the composition and role of the extracellular matrix.
16. Explain the theory of endosymbiosis and describe how the nuclear and internal membranes likely arose.
17. Explain several key lines of evidence in support of the theory of endosymbiosis.
1. List the main features of prokaryotic cells and summarize the structure and function of each.
2. List and describe the fundamental differences between prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells.
3. Contrast the internal structure of eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells.
4. Explain the basis for organizing all of life into a 3 domain system and describe the basic features of organisms found in each.
5. Identify the domain to which an organism belongs if given some of its cellular characteristics.
6. Describe the cell walls found in members of Archaea and in the gram positive and gram negative groups of bacteria.
7. Explain the modes of reproduction of typical prokaryotes and contrast this to the modes of reproduction carried out by eukaryotic cells.
8. Describe some unique modes of metabolism or cellular processes that are carried out by members of the Archaea and members of the Bacteria.
9. Describe the basic features of viruses and explain why they are not truly living.
